---
layout: post
title:  "Numbers"
date:   2021-12-21 00:00:00 +0000
categories: design
---

# Numbers (title TBD)

Computers are a lot like calculators: They are machines that take numbers, do something with them, and give other numbers back.

After computers came to exist in the 1950s, people began to realize all kinds of ways computer
numbers could achieve different goals. For example, numbers can be [used to represent letters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII).
They can also be used to control other devices, like telling a screen to generate images. Fast forward to now, and these ideas have become
so commonplace that we barely even think about them.

Video games have always been built on computer technology. The earliest things we can call "video games" date back to
[software written on some of the first computers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tennis_for_Two) in the 1950s.
The birth of video games as an industry was propelled by the availability of cost-effective [microprocessors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microprocessor),
beginning in the 1970s.

So, video games are built on top of computers, which are built on top of numbers. That means we can think about numbers
as the _essence_ of video games. Just like you and I are essentially made of atoms, everything in video games
is essentially made of numbers.

What are the implications of this? What does it mean for the developer, and what does it mean for the player? What kinds of possibilities or opportunities
do numbers create? What are their inherent limitations? Let's think about it!

## The Veil of Calculation

Numbers may be the atoms of video games, but when you look at another person, you don't see each atom making up their body. Instead, you see a person; a
meaningful whole. Even though in our brains we _logically_ understand that everybody is made up of atoms, in our hearts we see each person as a
complete and self-contained being.

There is a similar intuitive leap with games. We do not see them as a collection of rapidly changing numbers, but instead see what the numbers represent.

When a developer is writing the code for their game, they are making all kinds of numerical decisions like "How fast should the player walk?
How high should they jump?" But players think more abstractly, like "Can I outrun this enemy? Can I make the jump?" Players only tend to think
about numbers when they are displayed somewhere on the screen.

This means that there is a lot of power in _which numbers a player sees_. Let's start with an obvious example: Super Mario Bros.
